Determining Percent Completeness and Duplication for New Genomes
================================================================
This method was used in “Comparative genomics of planktonic Flavobacteriaceae from the Gulf of Maine using metagenomic data” (Tully et al 2014, Microbiome).

By determining a core set of functions/genes for a group of related organisms, it is possible to determine percent completeness and duplication of a new genome for that group.

###Dependencies

* [Biopython](http://biopython.org/wiki/Download)

* [HMMER3](http://hmmer.janelia.org/)

* TIGRFAM database - Version 14.0 ftp://ftp.jcvi.org/pub/data/TIGRFAMs/

* [BLAST+](http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi?PAGE_TYPE=BlastDocs&DOC_TYPE=Download)

##Procedure
* Gather protein FASTA files of the desired group of related organisms - for simplicity, you may want to use only organisms with a single genomic scaffold or be sure to combine multiple scaffolds into a single file. Remove non-chromosomal scaffolds
	* One possible way to create appropriate protein FASTA file would be to use FullGenbank_to_MultipleFASTA.py provided in this git
* Run each protein FASTA against the TIGRFAM 14.0 database using HMMER3
```
hmmscan -o <name>.out --cpu <#> --noali -E 0.00001 --tblout <name>.tbl /location/of/TIGRFAMs_14.0_HMM.LIB <input PROTEIN FAA>
```
* HMM_tbl_parse.py - parse through the TBL output format of a HMMER3 comparison between TIGRFAM and proteome of multiple genomes. The output will be a list of TIGRFAMs that represent the 'core' genome of the group and their representative counts.
	* Be sure to execute HMM_tbl_parse.py in a directory with TBL output(s)
```
python HMM_tbl_parse.py
```
* Compare the proteins of new genome to TIGRFAM 14.0 using HMMER3 with the same parameters above
* HMM_percent_complete.py - use coregenome_tigrfam.txt generated by HMM_tbl_parse.py and the TBL format of the new genome to provide a estimate of the % completeness of the genome.
```
python HMM_percent_complete.py coregenome_tigrfam.txt <target>.tbl
```
* ConservedSingleCopyGenes.py - take a set of protein FASTA files and perform iterative BLASTP searches to determine the conserved single copy genes of a group.
	* The % amino acid cutoff is user determined, but the % sequence alignment is fixed at 80%
	* This must be executed in a folder with the target protein FASTA files in the format *.protein.faa
	* A single FASTA file will be produced called singlecopygenes.faa
	* It is recommended to determine which genome represent the "most central" genome of the group of interest. This can be be done by creating a phylogenetic tree using a marker gene from each genome.
```
python ConservedSingleCopyGenes.py <phylogenetically central genome>.faa <percent AAID cutoff>
```
* Estimate_Percent_Duplication.py - uses singlecopygenes.faa generated using ConservedSingleCopyGenes.py to determine the % duplication of a new genome.
	* Especially if the duplication is low, manual inspection will likely reveal that some or
all of the duplicate genes can be explained as the result of assembly errors/duplications.
```
python Estimate_Percent_Duplication.py <CSCGs | singlecopygenes.faa> <target genome>.faa
```
